# How to take great photos of someone else
> 10 Portrait Photography that everyone should know

**To-do Items**
 - [ ] Make a good blog post
 - [ ] Sort your photos
 - [ ] Setup your portfolio
 - [ ] Setup stock image accounts
 - [ ] Instagram photos

## Intro
- always frustrates me that I'd take great photos of someone else
- and other people's photo of me would be ugly af
- I always look like the ugliest one in my family 

## Why you should know this?
> or Why I think this would be helpful
- Be nice to other people (cuz we're canadians n r nice right?) 
	- If we take good photos of someone else, we could make them prettier than they are
- Photos r important in 21st century. 
	- social medias (including LinkedIn etc.)
	- good travelling photos
- Going off the prev point. I've also considered creating a posing tutorial instead of a photography tutorials 
	- then i discovered it's much easier for you to teach someone else to be an adequate photographer compared to being a good model yourself
		- because if you have an awful photographer who loves to take photos from worst angles, it's really difficult to be a  model that adjusts and force the photographer to take good photos of u
- it's fun!! it's less fun when u take good photos of someone else n u cannot reciprocate. it makes everything really frustrating. 
	- adds a little creativity to your life

## Your Device
## General Tips
## The Model
# 1. Editing
 Good editing software for iPhone
	- Snapshot (Free
	- VISCO (Paid, there's ways around it)
	- Mix (Paid, free trial is good)

# 2. The Model
- Make them relaxed
- Tell them to not look at the camera
- Their eyes
- candid
# 3. The angle 
# 4. Just take some photos first! 
# 5. Take lots of Photos
# 6 Cater to your device
- use portrait mode for iPhone
- for other devices
- for camera (especially if you have an expensive DSLR, just use) generally there's a portra
# 7. Lighting and Flashlights

# 8. Background

# 9. Composition
Rule of the third
- don't cut your subject's body part in odd proportions
# 10. ACTUALLY USE UR CAMERA TO TAKE SOME PHOTOS

# Bibliogrpahy
[iPhone Portraiture](https://iphonephotographyschool.com/portraits/)

[A few useless tips with some decent tips](https://www.adorama.com/alc/portrait-photography-tips-for-beginners)



[https://www.onportraits.com/portrait-photography-tips-beginners/](https://www.onportraits.com/portrait-photography-tips-beginners/)
 

# 1. Lighting
Best Time for Photos
- Golden hours
- **The best time of day to take portrait photos is in the 2 to 3 hours after sunrise and the couple hours before sunset.**
- The times after morning golden hour and before evening golden hour will give you the best combination of soft, direction light, and bouncing, ambient light. The light will be warm, but not distracting. The dynamic range of the scene will be a little bit smaller, meaning that your camera will better capture the brights and the darks in the image. Your subjects won't have the sun in their eyes.
Direct Light
- On sunny days, place your subject under open shade
	- objects that block lights directly from above
	- so your subject doesn't squit or anything like that 
- A simple tip is to go around the subject and see which lighting is better (front light/side light/back light etc.)
- Use flashlights if it's too dark or go beside the streets lighting

# 2. Composition
- Rule of third
	- Their eyes
- Background
	- want to focus on the person because it's protrait photography. usually background should be non-distracting unless it's to show a particular story
	- Blur the background (using Portrait mode on iPhone)
	- Or having a uniform background, like the sky or the ground
	- Uniform colour and Neutral or fit the background based on the colour of the subject
- Body parts
	- Cropping at ankles, wrists, and foreheads is often too abrupt a cut-off for viewers. Arms and legs can act as leading lines for viewers that they follow out to the edge of the frame. 
	- It is generally more acceptable to crop mid-thigh for 3/4th length portraits or at the waist/above the elbow for half length portraits.
# 4. Practice!!
- Just take some photos first! 
- Take lots of Photos
- the key is to implement the tips and practice taking photos. go out for a photoshoot, take some photos while you're at home for fun or do a remote photoshoot with your friends
- candid
- The Angle
# 3. The Model
- Make them relaxed
- Not directly look into the camera
- Make them go around n do random stuff n you could just take a photo while they're doing things
- their back
	- Crack a joke
- Tell them to not look at the camera

# 5. Editing
 Good editing software for iPhone
	- Snapshot (Free
	- VISCO (Paid, there's ways around it)
	- Mix (Paid, free trial is good)
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE5OTExMTkwMTgsLTE5NTc4ODU3NDgsLT
k4MzU1NDAyMSwxNjM4MzUwOTcxLC0xMzI2NjI2NjA1LDIwMDky
NzE1NzksNzI2MzM1NDk0LDIxMjQ3MTE2MDAsLTg5NzgxNjI4Mi
wyMTE0OTAwNDc3LC04NzkyOTA5MTcsMzM2NTk0NTA2LC0xMDUz
NzE2MjI5LC0xMDYwNjY3NjQzLDE2NDMxNjc3NjksLTQ5MDAzNj
MzMywtMTIzMTk2MzY4OSwtMTAxNDQxOTYxMCwtMTAxNDQxOTYx
MF19
-->